---
title: "New website! (Migration to GitHub Pages)"
tags: misc
---

I've finally updated my website, though not in the way I had hinted at in the old website, shown below:

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/old_site_main.PNG" alt="Old site screenshot" %}

On that old site, which was a static web page (well, actually a Node.js app running on Heroku that just served up a static page), I mentioned that I planned on making the site more dynamic and moving to Microsoft Azure...I lied.

Well, kind of. The site might feel a little more dynamic (like a basic blog), but it's still statically generated via [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com). As for hosting, I'm actually just using [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/). The old website used [Bootplus](http://aozora.github.io/bootplus/) as a CSS framework, but here I've switched back to regular Bootstrap. Overall, I'm more confident that this set of tools is more appropriate and managable for what I have in mind.

I would also like readers of the website to be able to comment on the posts I make. However, due to my opinions on responsible data collection and privacy on the web (see [About]({{ "/about" | absolute_url }})), I couldn't just use WordPress or Disqus. On the other hand, I don't want to have to manage my own database and deal with security concerns. As a compromise, I've decided to use GitHub issues as a method to comment on my posts. Yes, this means that I'm letting GitHub track their users onto my webpage, but I was planning on embedding some Gists in my posts anyways. Also, I expect that readers of this type of material are coders themselves, who probably use and like GitHub, and I personally trust them more than other web platforms. I followed this great [tutorial](https://dc25.github.io/myBlog/2017/06/24/using-github-comments-in-a-jekyll-blog.html) to implement this here.

Things like style are a bit rough for now. While the website looks a lot more plain and boring compared to the old one, I'm hoping that this new setup will make it easier for me to publish some original content, so stay tuned!
